# Contributing to pokeranger2

Welcome! If you're reading this guide, then you probably want to contribute
decompilation, documentation, or tooling to the project. We value any and all
contributions, however small or large. Before getting started, please take a
look through this document for some important tips on how to smooth out the
experience of your first contribution.

Thanks again, and we look forward to hearing from you! 🎉

## Table of Contents

- [What work is there to be done?](#what-work-is-there-to-be-done)
- [How do I set up a development environment?](#how-do-i-set-up-a-development-environment)
  - [Auto-Completion and Language Server Setup](#auto-completion-and-language-server-setup)
  - [Editor Configuration](#editor-configuration)
  - [Code Formatting](#code-formatting)
- [How should I name things?](#how-should-i-name-things)
- [Your First Contribution](#your-first-contribution)
  - [What must I do before submitting a pull request?](#what-must-i-do-before-submitting-a-pull-request)
  - [How do I submit a pull request?](#how-do-i-submit-a-pull-request)
  - [What to Expect](#what-to-expect)

## What work is there to be done?

This repository is still early in its life-cycle, and the vast majority of code
is still in ARM assembly. The current goal of this project is to turn this
assembly into C++, the language originally used by the developers of the game.
This process is known as "decompilation".

More precisely, our goal is to produce a decompilation of the game that is
"matching". This means that, when compiling the project, the resulting binary is
bytes-for-bytes identical to the original ROM.

Documentation of the code, which is naming files, functions, and variables with
descriptive names, is not a priority at this stage. However, it is still a very
important part of the project, and we welcome contributions in this area as
well. The [`prsoa-debug`](https://github.com/Chesyon/prsoa-debug) project is
focused on documenting the game, and is also a great place to contribute.

We encourage you to join the `#pokeranger2` channel of the `pret` Discord (see
`README.md` for contact information) if you want to discuss potential
contributions or have any questions about the project.

## How do I set up a development environment?

If you haven't already, take the time to read through [`INSTALL.md`](INSTALL.md)
and ensure that you can successfully build a matching version of the binary
target:

```bash
make check
```

We provide some tooling within the repository to integrate with common developer
enhancements.

### Auto-Completion and Language Server Setup

We provide some instructions for setting up a variety of popular editors; refer
to the documentation snippets in `docs/editor_setup` to see if your editor has
specific instructions. If it is not, you may be able to adapt an existing guide
for your preferred editor; if so, feel free to file a pull request with a new
guide tailored to that editor!

### Editor Configuration

An `.editorconfig` file exists at the root of the repository, which helps
alleviate configuring individual editors to present code identically. Many
popular editors will provide support for this integration out-of-the-box with no
installation required; others may require a plugin or extension. For details on
which is which, refer to [this documentation](https://editorconfig.org).

### Code Formatting

We make use of [`clang-format`][clang-format] for our automated code formatting.
Some additional tooling is built into the repository to keep our code-style
consistent and alleviate the need for manual upkeep from maintainers via pull
requests reviews. To ensure that this style is _always_ upheld, a rule is
enabled on the repository that will check that every pull request matches the
style guidelines.

The caveat to this is that a contributor must remember to format their code. To
smooth out this experience, we:

1. Expose the `clang-format` build option generated by Meson via a `Makefile`
   entry-point. If we are ever unsure if the repository is incorrectly
   formatted, we can run `make format` as a manual check to ensure correctness.
2. Integrate `clang-format` into our commit workflows. We manage this via
   [`pre-commit`][pre-commit], which allows us to pin the version of
   `clang-format` used within the repository and ensure that end-users can
   easily install it.

> [!WARNING]
>
> To ensure that a pull request passes our CI checks, it is recommended that you
> install a version of `clang-format` which is the same version or more recent
> as is used in the CI checks. You can verify what version is expected by
> checking the field `version` in the file `.github/workflows/pr-lint.yml`.

> [!TIP]
>
> It is heavily recommended that you make use of `pre-commit` as a contributor.
> Doing so will ensure that you are using the same version of any on-commit
> tools as all other contributors and the CI.

To install `pre-commit` via a project-local Python virtual environment, run the
following commands in sequence:

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate.sh
pip install pre-commit
```

Once the installation completes, you can tell `pre-commit` to install the
configured hooks into your project:

```bash
pre-commit install
```

## How should I name things?

The eternal question. Some elements of development cannot be automated via
tooling, and we leave these to our best judgment.

The following applies to decompiled code that is not yet documented:

```cpp
// Use the "UnkClass_" prefix for class names, followed by the address where
// you first found the class in the code.
// In priority, use the address of its constructor.
class UnkClass_02000000 {
// Always start a class by declaring the access level, followed by its member
// functions.
public:
    UnkClass_02000000();
    ~UnkClass_02000000();

    // Use the "sub_" prefix for member functions, followed by the address
    // where this function lives.
    // For unknown parameters, use the "arg" prefix, followed by a number that
    // corresponds to its position.
    int sub_02000010(int arg0);

    // Use the "func" prefix for inline member functions, followed by a number
    // that is not yet allocated.
    inline int func0(int arg0)
    {
        return arg0;
    }

    // Use the "func" prefix for pure virtual functions, followed by a number
    // that is not yet allocated.
    virtual int func1(int arg0) = 0;

// Separate member functions from member variables with an access level, even
// if the same one is used.
public:
    // Use the "unk_" prefix for member variables, followed by a number that
    // corresponds to its offset within the class.
    u32 unk_00;
};

// Always prefer classes to struct, even if they only have public members.
// Use structs only if it is very clear that the subject is just a data container.

// Use the "UnkStruct_" prefix for struct names, followed by the address where
// you first found the class in the code.
struct UnkStruct_02001000 {
    // Use the "unk_" prefix for member variables, followed by a number that
    // corresponds to its offset within the struct.
    u32 unk_00;
};

// Use the "sub_" prefix for functions, followed by the address where this
// function lives.
// For unknown parameters, use the "arg" prefix, followed by a number that
// corresponds to its position.
int sub_02002000(int arg0)
{
    int v0; // For unknown local variables, use the "v" prefix, followed by
            // a number that is not yet allocated.
}
```

The following applies to documented code:

```cpp
// Use PascalCase for class names. Prefix them with "C".
class CMyClass {
// Always start a class by declaring the access level, followed by its member
// functions.
public:
    CMyClass();
    ~CMyClass();

    // Use PascalCase for member function names and camelCase for parameters.
    int MyFunction(int myParameter);

// Separate member functions from member variables with an access level, even
// if the same one is used.
public:
    // Use camelCase for member variables. Prefix them with "m_".
    u32 m_myField;
};

// For abstract classes that define no member function implementations,
// use the "I" prefix over the "C" prefix to denote that they are interfaces.
class IMyInterface {
public:
    virtual int MyFunction(int myParameter) = 0;
};

// For generic classes, use the "T" prefix over the "C" prefix to denote that
// they are templates.
template <typename T>
class TMyTemplate {
public:
    T MyFunction(T myParameter);
};

// Always prefer classes to struct, even if they only have public members.
// Use structs only if it is very clear that the subject is just a data container.

// Use PascalCase for structure names.
struct MyStruct {
    u32 myField; // Use camelCase for member variables.
};

// Use PascalCase for enum names.
enum MyEnum {
    // Use UPPER_SNAKE_CASE for enum members. Explicitly label the first member
    // with a direct assignment.
    MY_ENUM_MEMBER = 0,
    MY_ENUM_MEMBER, // Successive members should not have a direct assignment.
};

// Use PascalCase for function names and camelCase for parameters.
static int MyFunction(int myParameter)
{
    int myLocalVariable; // Use camelCase for local variables.
}

// Prefix the name of public functions with the name of their module,
// followed by an underscore.
int Module_MyExternalFunction(int myParameter)
{
    // ...
}

// Use camelCase for static variables. Prefix them with "s_".
static u32 s_myStaticVariable;
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> You may find class names in the RTTI structures of the game. If that's the
> case, then you _must_ use the same name for your class, as this is required to
> produce a matching ROM.

## Your First Contribution

You've picked out a feature, documented it, and have maybe even made some
commits. Congratulations! You're on the way to your first contribution.

If you are new to `git` and/or GitHub, take some time to read through
[The Basics of Git and GitHub][taar-git] from Team Aqua's Asset Repo. While
originally written with the target audience of `pokeemerald` modders in mind,
the concepts are still very applicable, and it provides a great overview of the
topics and terminology that is often thrown around among more seasoned `git`
users.

### How to name my commits?

This repository follows the [Conventional Commits][conv-commits] specification
for commit messages. In order of occurrence, you'll find the following prefixes
used in our commit history:

- **feat**: Introduces a new feature to the codebase. We use this in the
  repository for commits that decompile code, and also for code documentation.
  This is by far the most common prefix.
- **fix**: Denotes a fix to either the decompilation (for example, a wrong
  variable type) or the disassembly (for example, fixing hard-coded pointers).
- **refactor**: A change to the structure of the code or the repository that
  does not change the behavior of the code.
- **style**: A change that does not affect the meaning of the code (white-space,
  formatting, missing semicolons, etc.).
- **chore**: A catch-all prefix for commits that do not fit into the other
  categories. Use sparingly.
- **build**: Changes to the build system.
- **ci**: Changes to the CI configuration.
- **docs**: Changes to documentation (usually, Markdown files).

You are also encouraged to include a more detailed description of your commit in
the message body if it makes sense to do so. Think about what you would write
for the PR description if you were to open a PR with just that commit.

### What must I do before submitting a pull request?

1. Ensure that a local build of `make check` returns `OK`, which signals that
   your code builds a matching ROM.
2. Format your code such that it matches the repository's style guide. Refer to
   [Code Formatting](#code-formatting) for instructions on how to do this as an
   automatic part of your commit workflow or manually before you commit your
   changes.

We run automated checks via GitHub Actions to ensure that all pull requests meet
these requirements. If any of these are not done, then their respective checks
will fail, and your pull request will not be accepted.

### How do I submit a pull request?

We follow a basic fork-model for pull requests, since it provides the simplest
GitHub integration. If you haven't done so already, create a fork for your
repository [via GitHub][github-fork-docs], then set it up as your `origin`:

```bash
git remote add upstream https://github.com/Kuruyia/pokeranger2.git
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/<YOUR_USER>/pokeranger2.git
```

Now that you have a fork, checkout your changes to a clean branch, giving it a
name that reflects your work:

```bash
git switch -c <branch_name>
```

Finally, push to your new fork:

```bash
git push -u origin <branch_name>
```

...and submit your changes for review! 🚀

### What to Expect

A maintainer of the repository will respond to your Pull Request at their
earliest convenience. If you'd like to communicate with the maintainers more
directly, feel free to reach out to us in the `#pokeranger2` channel of the
`pret` Discord (see `README.md` for contact information).

Your pull request will be labeled with `new-contributor`; this is _not_ a
target, we promise! It is just your first welcome aboard the team.

Maintainers are encouraged to follow [Conventional Comments][conv-comments],
which helps to more clearly convey tone of speech and clarify the goal of a
particular piece of feedback. In general, these prefixes can be read as:

1. **suggestion**: A proposed improvement to the subject.
2. **polish**: A variant of suggestion where quality can immediately be
   improved. Applicable to cases where there is nothing wrong with the subject.
3. **quibble**: A trivial, often preference-based request. Inherently
   non-blocking.
4. **issue**: A highlight for a specific problem with the subject. For our
   use-case, these typically are framed around minimizing wires for users of the
   repository to trip over.
5. **todo**: A small, trivial, necessary change.
6. **question**: A curiosity from the author, often seeking understanding of why
   the code behaves in the way that it does.
7. **thought**: An idea that popped up during review. Often left so that we do
   not lose access to past ideas. Inherently non-blocking.
8. **chore**: A simple task that must be completed before the subject can be
   officially accepted. Tends to refer to process (and may indicate
   opportunities to improve developer tooling).
9. **note**: A highlight that the reader should notice. Inherently non-blocking.

You may receive a lot of feedback on your first request, and it may feel
intimidating. Rest assured that it is not targeted, nor is a newcomer's review
more-heavily scrutinized than a long-time contributor's. We all have room to
improve. 🙏

## Additional resources

Here are some additional resources that you may find helpful as you get started:

- [`prsoa-debug`][prsoa-debug]: A project with debug information about Pokémon
  Ranger: Shadows of Almia. This is where the main documentation efforts are
  currently ongoing.
- [Practical C++ Decompilation][hexrays-2011] and
  [Compiler Internals: Exceptions and RTTI][hexrays-2012]: Two presentations
  from Hex-Rays' 2011 and 2012 Recon conferences that dive deeper into C++ RTTI
  internal structures. More specifically, read the parts about GCC which are
  pretty applicable to this project.
- [The Itanium C++ ABI][itanium-abi]: Defines a ton of internal structures used
  in C++ for RTTI, virtual tables, constructors, destructors, exception
  handling, and more.

[clang-format]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html
[conv-comments]: https://conventionalcomments.org/
[conv-commits]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/
[github-fork-docs]: https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo
[hexrays-2011]: https://hex-rays.com/hubfs/freefile/Recon-2011-Skochinsky.pdf
[hexrays-2012]: https://hex-rays.com/hubfs/freefile/Recon-2012-Skochinsky-Compiler-Internals.pdf
[itanium-abi]: https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/abi.html
[pre-commit]: https://pre-commit.com/
[prsoa-debug]: https://github.com/Chesyon/prsoa-debug
[taar-git]: https://github.com/Pawkkie/Team-Aquas-Asset-Repo/wiki/The-Basics-of-GitHub
